                 Phrygia and the Gordian Knot

The Greeks loved to mythologize the founders of towns and cities. Athena’s
gift of the olive to the people of Athens and her raising of Erechtheus (the
issue of Hephaestus and the semen-soaked fillet, you will recall) to be the
founder of the city seems to have helped foster the Athenian sense of self.
The story of Cadmus and the dragon’s teeth did the same for Thebans.
Sometimes, as is the case with the founding of the city of Gordium,
elements of the story can move from myth to legend to actual, identifiable
history.

In Macedonia there lived a poor but ambitious peasant called GORDIAS. One
day, as he laboured in his barren stony fields, an eagle landed on the pole of
his oxcart and fixed him with a fierce glare.
   ‘I knew it!’ Gordias said to himself, ‘I have always felt that I was marked
for greatness. This eagle proves it. I have a destiny.’
   He raised his plough and drove the ox and cart many hundreds of miles
towards the oracle of Zeus Sabazios. fn1 As Gordias lumbered along, the
eagle gripped the pole fast with its talons, never flinching no matter how
violently the cart bumped and swayed over the potholes and boulders.
   On the way, Gordias encountered a young Telmissian girl endowed in
equal measure with great prophetic powers and an alluring beauty that
stirred his heart. She seemed to have been expecting him and urged that
they make haste at once to Telmissus, where he should sacrifice his ox to
Zeus Sabazios. Gordias, fired by the coming together of all his hopes,
undertook to follow her advice so long as she agreed to marry him. She
bowed her head in assent and they set off for the city.
   It so happened that, at this very moment, the King of Phrygia had just
died in his bed. Since he left no heir or obvious successor, the people of his
capital hurried to the shrine of Zeus Sabazios to find out what should be
done. The oracle told them to anoint and crown the first man to enter the
city in a cart. So it was that the townspeople were clustering excitedly
round the gates at the very moment that Gordias and the prophetess arrived.
The eagle flew from his perch with a great cry as they crossed the threshold.
The populace threw their caps in the air and cheered until they were hoarse.
   In a very short time Gordias had gone from scratching a lonely living in
the Macedonian dirt to being wed to a beautiful Telmissian seer and
crowned King of Phrygia. He drew up plans to rebuild the city (which he
immodestly named Gordium in his own honour) and settled down to reign
over Phrygia and live happily ever after. Which he did. Sometimes, even in
the world of Greek mythology, things go well.
   The oxcart became a holy relic, a symbol of Gordias’s divine right to
rule. A carved post of polished dogwood was placed in the agora and the
yoke of the cart secured to it with a rope tied up in the most intricate knot
the world had seen. Gordias was determined that the cart should never be
stolen from the town square. The legend arose, in that mysterious and
unattributable way that legends do arise, that whoever untied this fiendish
knot would one day rule Asia. Many tried – master mariners,
mathematicians, toymakers, artists, artisans, tricksters, philosophers and
ambitious children, but none could even begin to unpick its elaborate
interwoven hitches, loops and twists.
   The great Gordian knot lay unsolved for more than a thousand years until
a reckless and brilliant young Macedonian conqueror and king called
Alexander rode with his army into town. When told of the legend he took
one look at the great tangle of rope, raised his sword and swept it down,
cutting the Gordian knot and earning the delighted praise of his own and
future generations. fn2
   Meanwhile, back in time, Gordias’s son Prince MIDAS grew up to be a
friendly, merry young man, loved and admired by all who knew him.
                                 Midas


                            The Ugly Stranger

In due time Gordias died and his son Midas succeeded him as king. His life
was simple but elegant – who had grown up to be a friendly, merry young
man, bred and admired by all – Phrygia was not an especially rich kingdom,
but most of the time and money that Midas did possess were lavished on a
magnificent rose garden in the palace grounds. It became known as one of
the wonders of the age. Midas loved nothing more than to roam this
paradise of colour and fragrance and tend to his plants – each one of which
bore sixty glorious blooms.
   One morning, as he wandered the garden, noting with habitual delight
how exquisitely the beads of dew twinkled on the delicate petals of his
darling roses, Midas tripped over the slumbering form of an ugly, pot-
bellied old man, curled up on the ground and snoring like a pig.
   ‘Oh,’ said Midas, ‘I’m so sorry. I didn’t see you there.’
   With a belch and a hiccup, the old man rose to his feet and bowed low.
‘Beg pardon,’ he said. ‘Couldn’t help but be drawn by the sweet scent of
your roses last night. Fell asleep.’
   ‘Not at all,’ said Midas politely. He had been brought up always to show
respect for his elders. ‘But why don’t you come into the palace and partake
of some breakfast?’
   ‘Don’t mind if I do. Handsome of you.’
   Midas had no way of knowing that this ugly, pot-bellied old man was
Silenus, boon-companion of the wine god Dionysus.
   ‘Perhaps you would like a bath?’ he suggested as they made their way
indoors.
   ‘What for?’
   ‘Oh, nothing. Just a thought.’
   Silenus stayed for ten days and ten nights, making deep inroads into
Midas’s meagre cellar, but rewarding him with outrageous songs, dances
and stories.
   On the tenth night Silenus announced that he would be leaving the next
morning.
   ‘My master will be pining for me,’ he said. ‘Don’t suppose your people
could conduct me to him, could they?’
   ‘With pleasure,’ said Midas.
   The next day Midas and his retinue led Silenus on the long journey to the
southern vineyards that Dionysus liked to frequent at that time of year.
After many hours of struggling through the heat and tangle of choked lanes,
steep hills and narrow byways they came upon the wine god and his
attendants picnicking in a field. Dionysus was overjoyed to see his old
friend.
   ‘Wine tastes sour without you,’ he said. ‘Dances go wrong and music
falls flat on the ears. Where have you been?’
   ‘I got lost,’ said Silenus. ‘This kind fellow –’ he pushed the reluctant
Midas forward to face the god, ‘– took me in to his palace and gave me the
run of the place. I drank most of his wine, ate most of his food, pissed in his
water jars and sicked up over his silk cushions. Never complained.
Thoroughly good soul.’ Silenus slapped Midas on the back. Midas smiled
as best he could. He hadn’t known about the water jars and the silk
cushions.
   Dionysus, like many deep drinkers, could easily become very emotional
and affectionate. He pawed gratefully at Midas. ‘You see?’ he declared to
the world in general. ‘You see? Just when you lose faith in humanity, they
show their worth like this. This is what my father means by xenia. Makes
my heart burst. Name it.’
   ‘Excuse me?’ Midas was keen to leave. Ten days and nights of Silenus
had been quite enough. He yearned now to be alone with his flowers. A
drunken Dionysus with a full entourage of Maenads and satyrs might just
be too much even for his patience.
   ‘Name your reward. Anything. Whatever you – hic! – desire I will
providely divine. Which is to say,’ Dionysus amended with dignity, ‘I will
divinely provide. So there,’ he added belligerently, turning suddenly round
to face off no one in particular.
   ‘You mean, my lord, that I can ask anything of you?’
   Which of us has not entertained joyous fantasies of genies and fairies
granting us wishes? I am sorry to say that, at this offer from Dionysus,
Midas had rather a rush of blood to the head.
   I have mentioned that Phrygia was one of the poorer kingdoms, and
while Midas was not considered by his friends to be rapacious or
avaricious, he did long, like any ruler, for more money to spend on his
armies, his palace, his subjects and his municipal amenities. The expenses
of a royal household mount up and Midas had always been too benevolent a
king to burden his people with heavy taxes. And so he found a most
extraordinary wish making its way from his fevered brain to his mouth.
   ‘Then I ask this,’ he said; ‘that everything I touch be turned to gold.’
   Dionysus smiled a rather diabolical smile. ‘Really? That’s what you
want?’
   ‘That is what I want.’
   ‘Go home,’ said the god. ‘Bathe yourself in wine and go to bed. When
you arise in the morning, your wish will be granted.’

                                 Goldfinger

It is probable that Midas did not believe that anything would come of this
exchange. The gods were notorious for dodging, twisting and sliding out of
their obligations.
    Nevertheless, just in case – after all, what harm could it do? I mean, one
never knows – that night, Midas poured a few hogsheads from his
diminishing store of wine into the royal bath. The fumes from it ensured
that when he went to bed he enjoyed a deep and untroubled sleep.
    Midas awoke to a sparkling morning that cast all ideas of wild wishes
and drunken gods from his mind. With thoughts only for his flowers, he
sprang from bed and hurried to his beloved garden.
    Never had the roses looked more beautiful. He leaned down and sniffed a
pink young hybrid that was in that perfect state midway between bud and
full bloom. The exquisite fragrance made him giddy with joy. He lovingly
made to unfurl the petals. In an instant the stem and flower had been
transformed into gold. Solid gold.
    Midas stared in disbelief.
    He touched another rose and then another. The moment his fingers
touched them they turned to gold. He ran up and down around the garden in
a whooping frenzy, brushing his hands along the bushes until every one had
been frozen into hard shining precious, priceless, glorious, golden gold.
   Skipping and shouting with joy Midas beheld what had once been a
garden of rare roses and was now the most valuable treasure in all the
world. He was rich! He was insanely, monumentally rich! No man on earth
had ever been richer.
   The sound of his exultant shouts attracted his wife, who came out of the
palace doors and stood looking down, their infant daughter in her arms.
   ‘Darling, why are you shouting?’
   Midas ran up to her and encircled mother and child in a tight hug of
excited joy. ‘You won’t believe it!’ he said. ‘Everything I touch turns to
gold! Look! All I have to do is – oh!’
   He stepped back to see that his wife and infant girl were now one fused
golden statue, glittering in the morning sun, a frozen mother and child
group that any sculptor would have been proud of.
   ‘I’ll attend to that later,’ Midas said to himself. ‘There must be a way to
recover them … Dionysus wouldn’t be so … meanwhile – Zim! Zam! Zoo!’
   A guard on sentry, the great side-door to the palace and his favourite
throne were now entirely gold.
   ‘Vim! Vam! Voo!’
   The side-table, his goblet, his cutlery – solid gold!
   But what was this? Crack! His teeth almost broke on a hard golden
peach. Tunk! His lips met metallic wine. Thwop! A heavy gold nugget that
had once been a linen napkin crushed and bruised his lips.
   The unbounded delight began to fade as Midas realized the full import of
his gift.
   You may imagine the rest. All at once the thrill and pleasure of his
ownership of gold were changed to dread and fear. All Midas touched
turned to gold, but his heart turned to lead. No words of his, no shrieks of
imprecation to the heavens could return his cold solidified wife and
daughter to quick warm life. The sight of his beloved roses dropping their
heavy heads caused his own to bow in misery. Everything around him
glinted and glittered, gleamed and glimmered with a gorgeous gaudy golden
glow but his heart was as grim and grey as granite.
   And the hunger and thirst! After three days of food and drink turning to
inedible gold the moment it touched him, Midas felt ready for death.
   Atop his golden bed, whose hard heavy sheets offered no warmth or
comfort, he fell into a fevered sleep. He dreamed of his flowers blooming
back into soft, delicate life – his roses, yes, but most of all the flowers that
he now understood mattered most, his wife and child. In the wild, contorted
dream he saw the soft colours returning to their cheeks and the light shining
once more in their eyes. As these beguiling images danced and flickered in
his mind the voice of Dionysus boomed inside him.
   ‘Foolish man! It is fortunate for you that Silenus is so fond of you. Only
for his sake do I show you mercy. When you awaken in the morning, betake
yourself to the River Pactolus. Plunge your hands in its waters and your
enchantment will be dissolved. Whatever you wash in the fast-flowing
stream will be restored to you.’
   The next morning Midas did what the voice in his dream had instructed.
As promised, contact with the waters of the river relieved him of his golden
touch. Mad with joy, he spent a good week shuttling back and forth
immersing his wife, his daughter, his guards, servants, roses and all of his
possessions in the river and clapping his hands in delight as they returned to
their valueless – but priceless – original state.
   After this, the waters of the Pactolus, which wind around the foothills of
Mount Tmolus, became the single greatest source of electrum, a natural
alloy of gold and silver, in all the Aegean.

                              King Midas’s Ears

You would think that Midas had learned his lesson by now. The lesson that
repeats and repeats throughout the story of man. Don’t mess with the gods.
Don’t trust the gods. Don’t anger the gods. Don’t barter with the gods.
Don’t compete with the gods. Leave the gods well alone. Treat all blessings
as a curse and all promises as a trap. Above all, never insult a god. Ever.
   In one respect Midas had certainly changed. He now spurned not just
gold, but all riches and possessions. Shortly after Dionysus lifted the curse,
Midas became a devoted follower of Pan, the goat-footed god of nature,
fauns, meadows and all the wild things of the world.
   With flowers in his hair, sandals on his feet and the merest suggestion of
clothing covering his modesty, Midas left his wife and daughter in charge of
Phrygia and devoted himself to a hippy-happy life of simple bucolic virtue.
   All might have been well had not his master Pan taken it into his head to
challenge Apollo to a competition to determine which was the superior, the
lyre or the pipes.
   One afternoon, in a meadow lying on the slopes of Mount Tmolus, Pan
put the syrinx to his lips before an audience of fauns, satyrs, dryads,
nymphs, assorted demigods and other lesser immortals. A coarse but
likeable air in the Lydian mode emerged. It seemed to summon barking
deer, rushing waters, gambolling rabbits, rutting stags and galloping horses.
The rough, rustic tune delighted the audience, especially Midas, who really
did worship Pan and all the frolicking mirth and madness that the goat-
footed one represented.
   When Apollo stood and sounded the first notes of his lyre, a hush fell.
From his strings arose visions of universal love, harmony and happiness, a
deep abiding joy in life and a sense of heaven itself.
   When he had finished the audience rose as one to applaud. Tmolus, the
deity of the mountain, called out, ‘The lyre of the great lord Apollo wins.
All agreed?’
   ‘Aye, aye!’ roared the satyrs and fauns.
   ‘Apollo, Apollo!’ cried the nymphs and dryads.
   One lone voice demurred.
   ‘No!’
   ‘No?’ Dozens of heads turned to see who could have dared dissent.
   Midas rose to his feet. ‘I disagree. I say the pipes of Pan produce the
better sound.’
   Even Pan was astonished. Apollo quietly put down his lyre and walked
towards Midas.
   ‘Say that again.’
   It could at least be said of Midas that he had the courage of his
convictions. He swallowed twice before repeating, ‘I – I say the pipes make
a better sound. Their music is more … exciting. More artistic.’
   Apollo must have been in a soft mood that day, for he did not slaughter
Midas on the spot. He did not peel the skin from him layer by layer as he
had done to Marsyas when that unfortunate had had the temerity to
challenge him. He did not cause Midas even the slightest amount of pain
but just said softly, ‘You honestly think Pan played better than me?’
   ‘I do.’
   ‘Well, in that case,’ said Apollo, with a laugh, ‘you must have the ears of
an ass.’
   No sooner were these words out of the god’s mouth than Midas felt
something strange and warm and rough going on in his scalp. As he put an
enquiring hand to his head, howls and hoots and screams and screeches of
mocking laughter started to come from the assembled throng. They could
see what Midas could not. Two large grey donkey ears had pushed their
way through his hair and were twitching and flicking back and forth for all
the world to see.
   ‘It seems I was right,’ said Apollo. ‘You do indeed have the ears of an
ass.’
   Crimsoning with shame and mortification, Midas turned and fled the
meadow, the taunts and jeers of the crowd sounding all the more clearly in
his great furry ears.
   His life as a camp-follower of Pan was over. Tying his head in a kind of
turban, he returned to his wife and family in the palace of Gordium and –
his carefree experiment in country living decidedly done with – settled back
down into the life of a king.
   The only person who saw his ass’s ears was, necessarily, the servant who
cut his hair every month. No one else in Phrygia knew the terrible secret
and Midas was determined it should stay that way.
   ‘Here’s the deal,’ Midas told the barber. ‘I give you a bigger salary and a
more generous pension than any other member of the palace staff and you
keep quiet about what you have seen. If, however, you breathe a word to
anyone I will slaughter your family before your eyes, cut out your tongue
and leave you to wander the world in mute poverty and exile. Understood?’
   The frightened barber nodded.
   For three years each side kept to the bargain. The barber’s wife and
family waxed fat and happy on the extra money that came in and no one
found out about the king’s asinine auditory appendages. Turbans in the
Midas style caught on throughout Phrygia, Lydia, Thrace and beyond. All
was well.
   But secrets are terrible things to have to keep. Especially such juicy ones
as that to which the royal barber was privy. Every day he would wake up
and feel that the knowledge was writhing and swelling inside him. The
barber loved his wife and family and was in any case loyal enough to his
monarch not to have any wish to humiliate or embarrass him. But that
bulging, ballooning secret had to be released somehow before he burst. No
unmilked cow with swollen udders, no mother of overdue twins, no gut-
stuffed gastronome straining on the privy, could ever feel such a desperate
need for relief from their agonies than this poor barber.
   Finally he hit upon a scheme which he felt sure would rid him of his
burden without endangering his family. Awaking from a tortured night in
which he had dreamed that he revealed the secret to the gaping populace of
Gordium from a balcony in the main square, he went out at first light deep
into the remote countryside. In a lonely place by a stream he dug a deep
trench in the ground. Looking about him in all directions to make sure that
he was alone and that there was no possibility of being overheard, he knelt
down, cupped his hands around his mouth and shouted these words into the
hole:
   ‘Midas has ass’s ears!’
   Scrabbling frantically to close up the hole before the words could escape,
he failed to notice one tiny seed floating down and settling at the bottom …
   When the backfilling was done, the barber stamped fiercely up and down
on the earth to seal in the dreadful secret. He skipped all the way back to
Gordium, headed straight for his favourite tavern and ordered a flagon of
the house’s best wine. He could drink now without fear that the wine might
loosen his tongue. It was as if he were Atlas and the sky had finally been
lifted from his shoulders.
   Meanwhile, over the next few weeks, back in the remote field by the
stream that tiny seed, warmed by the soft breath of Gaia below, began to
germinate. Soon, a delicate little reed was shouldering its way through the
topsoil and pushing its delicate head into the air. As the breeze caught the
reed it softly whispered ‘Midas has ass’s ears.’
   The faint words reached the rushes and sedges that fringed the riverbank.
‘Midas has ass’s ears …’
   The susurration of rushes and the hiss of sedges was swept on by the
grasses and leaves of the trees and swiftly the soughing of cypresses and
sallows sent the sound through the breeze.
   ‘Midas has ass’s ears,’ sighed the branches.
   ‘Midas has ass’s ears,’ sang the birds.
   And at last the news reached the city.
   ‘Midas has ass’s ears!’
   King Midas woke with a start. There was laughter and shouting in the
street outside the palace. He crept to the window, crouched down and
listened.
   The humiliation was too much for him to bear. Without stopping to
wreak his vengeance on the barber and the barber’s family, he mixed a
poisonous draught of ox-blood, raised his eyes heavenwards, gave a bitter
laugh and a shrug, drained the drink and died.
   Poor Midas. His name will always mean someone fortunate and rich, but
truly he was unlucky and poor. If only he had kept to his roses. Green
fingers are better than gold.
